CASMCMS-8286 - add console troubleshooting documentation. (#4031)
Cray-HPE/docs-csm: operations/conman/Troubleshooting_Guide.md

# Troubleshooting Guide

There are many things that can prevent the conman service from successfully connecting to a
single node console or can cause problems with the entire deployment. This is a guide on
how to look at all aspects of the service to determine what the current problem is.

## Prerequisites

> The user performing these procedures needs to have access permission to the `cray-console-operator`
> and `cray-console-node` pods. There will be a lot of interaction with the `cray-console-operator` pod
> so set up an environment variable to refer to that pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(`ncn-mw#`) The user performing these procedures needs to have access permission to the `cray-console-operator`
and `cray-console-node` pods. There will be a lot of interaction with the `cray-console-operator` pod,
so set up an environment variable to refer to that pod:
```

```bash

> OP_POD=$(kubectl get pods -n services \
>         -o wide|grep cray-console-operator|awk '{print $1}')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OP_POD=$(kubectl get pods -n services -o wide|grep cray-console-operator|awk '{print $1}')
```

```

## Check state of console pods

There are a number of pods that work together to provide the console services. If any of the pods are
not working correctly, it will impact the ability to connect to specific consoles and monitor the console
logs.

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Query Kubernetes to inspect the console pods:

    ```bash
    kubectl -n services get pods | grep console
    ```

    Example output:

    ```text
    cray-console-data-5448f99fb-mbrf4             2/2     Running        0     18d
    cray-console-data-postgres-0                  3/3     Running        0     18d
    cray-console-data-postgres-1                  3/3     Running        0     18d
    cray-console-data-postgres-2                  3/3     Running        0     18d
    cray-console-data-wait-for-postgres-1-rnrt6   0/2     Completed      0     18d
    cray-console-node-0                           3/3     Running        0     18d
    cray-console-node-1                           3/3     Running        0     18d
    cray-console-operator-6d4d5b84d9-rwsdd        2/2     Running        3     25d
    ```

    There should be one `cray-console-operator` pod.

>     There should be multiple `cray-console-node` pods. A standard deployment will start with 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    There should be multiple `cray-console-node` pods. A standard deployment will start with two
```

    pods and scale up from there depending on the size of the system and the configuration.

    There should be one `cray-console-data` pod and three `cray-console-data-postgres` pods.

>     All pods should be in the `Completed` or `Running` state. If pods are in any other state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All pods should be in the `Completed` or `Running` state. If pods are in any other state, then
```

    use the usual Kubernetes techniques to find out what is wrong with those pods.

## Is the node assigned to a specific `cray-console-node` pod?

The first thing to check is if the specific node is assigned to a `cray-console-node` pod that should
be monitoring the node for log traffic and providing a means to interact with the console.

> 1. (`ncn-mw#`) Set the `xname` of the node you are interested in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) Set the component name (xname) of the node whose console is being checked.
```

    ```bash

>     XNAME="xName of the node - ie x3000c0s19b2n0"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    XNAME="xName of the node - e.g. x3000c0s19b2n0"
```

    ```

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Find which `cray-console-node` pod the node is assigned to.

    ```bash
    NODEPOD=$(kubectl -n services exec $OP_POD -c cray-console-operator -- \
        sh -c "/app/get-node $XNAME" | jq .podname | sed 's/"//g')
    echo $NODEPOD
    ```

    The returned node pod should be one of the `cray-console-node` pods see in the listing
    of pods above. An expected output from the above would be:

    ```text
    cray-console-node-0
    ```

>     If this is the case, proceed to [Investigate specific node connection](Troubleshoot_ConMan_Failing_to_Connect_to_a_Console.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If this is the case, proceed to [Troubleshoot ConMan Failing to Connect to a Console](Troubleshoot_ConMan_Failing_to_Connect_to_a_Console.md).
```

>     If the node is not assigned to a `cray-console-node` pod, you will see a result with an
>     invalid pod name like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the node is not assigned to a `cray-console-node` pod, then the result will have an invalid pod name. For example:
```

    ```text
    cray-console-node-
    ```

    In this case, proceed to [Investigate service problem](#investigate-service-problem) to find out why the
    node is not assigned to a pod.

## Investigate service problem

> When the entire service is having problems we must track down which component is causing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the entire service is having problems, the next step is to determine which component is causing the
```

issue. All three services need to work together to provide console connections.

> 1. Underlying database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check the underlying database.
```

    Sometimes the `cray-console-data` pods can report healthy, but the actual Postgres instance

>     can be unhealthy. See [Investigate `cray-console-data-postgres`](#investigate-postgres-deployment) for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    can be unhealthy. See [Investigate Postgres deployment](#investigate-postgres-deployment) for
```

    information on how to investigate further.

> 1. (`ncn-mw#`) Restart the `cray-console-operator` node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) Restart the `cray-console-operator` pod.
```

>     There are rare cases where the `cray-console-operator` pod may be reporting as `Running`
>     to Kubernetes, but actually be unhealthy. In this case a restart of the pod will resolve
>     the issue and start the communication between the services again.
> 
>     ```bash
>     kubectl -n services delete pod $OP_POD
>     ```
> 
>     Wait for the new `cray-console-operator` pod to reach a `Running` state.
> 
>     ```bash
>     kubectl -n services get pods | grep cray-console-operator
>     ```
> 
>     Example output when ready to proceed:
> 
>     ```text
>     cray-console-operator-6d4d5b84d9-66svs       2/2     Running     0    60s
>     ```
> 
>     Now there is a different pod name, so the `OP_POD` variable needs to be set again.
> 
>     ```bash
>     OP_POD=$(kubectl get pods -n services \
>             -o wide|grep cray-console-operator|awk '{print $1}')
>     ```
> 
>     Give the system several minutes to restart and update, then see if the issue
>     is resolved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    There are rare cases where the `cray-console-operator` pod may be reporting as `Running`
    to Kubernetes, but actually be unhealthy. In this case a restart of the pod will resolve
    the issue and start the communication between the services again.

    1. Restart the pod.

        ```bash
        kubectl -n services delete pod $OP_POD
        ```

    1. Wait for the new `cray-console-operator` pod to reach a `Running` state.

        ```bash
        kubectl -n services get pods | grep cray-console-operator
        ```

        Example output when ready to proceed:

        ```text
        cray-console-operator-6d4d5b84d9-66svs       2/2     Running     0    60s
        ```

    1. Now there is a different pod name, so the `OP_POD` variable needs to be set again.

        ```bash
        OP_POD=$(kubectl get pods -n services -o wide|grep cray-console-operator|awk '{print $1}')
        ```

    1. Wait several minutes, then see if the issue is resolved.
```

1. Restart the entire set of services.

    To restart everything from scratch, follow the directions in

>     [Reset Console Services](./Troubleshoot_ConMan_Reset_Console_Services.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [Complete Reset of the Console Services](Troubleshoot_ConMan_Reset_Console_Services.md).
```

## Investigate Postgres deployment

Sometimes the database that is holding the current status information for the console services has
problems that keep it from saving and reporting data. Depending on when this happens, the other
services may be different states of managing node consoles. The `cray-console-node` pods will continue
to monitor the nodes that have been assigned to them, but if the pod restarts or new nodes are added

> to the system they will not be able to get new nodes assigned to the currently running pods. This may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the system, they will not be able to get new nodes assigned to the currently running pods. This may
```

lead to some `cray-console-node` pods continuing to monitor nodes, but other pods not having any nodes
assigned to them.

> **`NOTE`** There is no persistent data in the `cray-console-data` Postgres database. It only contains
current state information and will rebuild itself automatically once it is functional again. There is no
need to save or restore data from this database.

1. Check on the current running state of the `cray-console-data-postgres` database.

    1. (`ncn-mw#`) Find the `cray-console-data-postgres` pods and note one that is in `Running` state.

        ```bash
        kubectl -n services get pods | grep cray-console-data-postres
        ```

        Example output:

        ```text
        cray-console-data-postgres-0    3/3     Running  0  26d
        cray-console-data-postgres-1    3/3     Running  0  26d
        cray-console-data-postgres-2    3/3     Running  0  26d
        ```

>     1. (`ncn-mw#`) Exec into one of the healthy pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. (`ncn-mw#`) Log into one of the healthy pods.
```

        ```bash

>         export DATA_PG_POD=cray-console-data-postgres-1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        DATA_PG_POD=cray-console-data-postgres-1
```

        kubectl -n services exec -it $DATA_PG_POD -c postgres -- sh
        ```

> 
>         Expected command line:
> 
>         ```text
>         #
>         ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     1. Check the status of the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. (`pod#`) Check the status of the database.
```

        | cray-console-data-postgres-1 | 10.37.0.45 | Leader | running  | 47 |         0 |
        | cray-console-data-postgres-2 | 10.32.0.52 |        | running  | 14 |       608 |
        +------------------------------+------------+--------+---------+----+-----------+
        ```

        Example output if the leader is missing:

        ```text
        + Cluster: cray-console-data-postgres (7244964360609890381) --------+----+-----------+
        |            Member            |    Host    |  Role  |  State       | TL | Lag in MB |
        +------------------------------+------------+--------+--------------+----+-----------+
        | cray-console-data-postgres-0 | 10.43.0.8  |        | running      |    |   unknown |
        | cray-console-data-postgres-1 | 10.37.0.45 |        | start failed |    |   unknown |
        | cray-console-data-postgres-2 | 10.32.0.52 |        | start failed |    |   unknown |
        +------------------------------+------------+--------+--------------+----+-----------+
        ```

        If any of the replicas are showing a problem, look at the following troubleshooting

>         pages to attempt to fix the postgres instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        pages to attempt to fix the Postgres instance:
```

>         [Troubleshoot Postgres Database](../kubernetes/Troubleshoot_Postgres_Database.md)
>         [Recover from Postgres WAL Event](../kubernetes/Recover_from_Postgres_WAL_Event.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

        * [Troubleshoot Postgres Database](../kubernetes/Troubleshoot_Postgres_Database.md)
        * [Recover from Postgres WAL Event](../kubernetes/Recover_from_Postgres_WAL_Event.md)
```

        If the database can not be made healthy through these procedures, the easiest way to
        resolve this is to perform a complete reset of the console services including

>         reinstalling the `cray-console-data` service. Complete instructions for that are found:
>         [Reset Console Services](Troubleshoot_ConMan_Reset_Console_Services.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        reinstalling the `cray-console-data` service. See
        [Complete Reset of the Console Services](Troubleshoot_ConMan_Reset_Console_Services.md)
```
